for
e
don't
spe
get
e
to
for
spe
good
for
e
spe
for
en
e
for
yeah
I
for
[Music]
the
9,517 meeting of the Security Council is
called to
order the provisional agenda for this
meeting is situation in the Middle
East the agenda is
[Applause]
adopted in ordance with rules 37 of the
council's provisional rules of procedure
I invite the representatives of the
Islamic Republic of Iran the Syrian Arab
Republic and turkey to participate in
this meeting is so
decided in accordance with rule 39 of
the council's provisional rules of
procedure I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting
Mr G
Peterson special Envoy of the Secretary
General for Syria and Madame Lisa dton
director of the humanitarian financing
and resource mobilization division of
the office uh for the coordination of
humanitarian Affairs it is so
decided the security Council will now
begin its consideration of item two of
the
agenda I now give the floor to Mr Guyer
Peterson thank you Mr
President 2023 has been another very
difficult year for Syria a year that saw
devastating earthquakes humanitarian
needs reaching new highs the economy
plummeting to new loves and diversed
violence in three
years the year also saw new diplomatic
openings but did not lead to tangible
changes on the ground for the lives of
syrians in short this has been another
tragic year for Syrian civilians who
were killed injured displaced detained
and abducted in alarming numbers and who
saw no tangable moves towards a better
future instead on top of everything else
Syrian s face the danger of regional
spillover adding further fuel to the
fire
Mr President these last weeks have seen
a
reification of spillover effects from
the de the developments in the occupied
Palestinian territory and Israel we have
seen the following multiple air strikes
attributed to Israel across Syria the
Syrian government reported that Israeli
a strikes rendered Damascus and Leo
airports
non-operational
currently only lakia airport is
functional affecting both civilian air
traffic and the UN humanitarian
operations we have seen multiple reports
of missiles launched from Southern Syria
over the occupied Syrian Golan towards
Israel and of IDF fire and near daily
attacks on us positions in Northeast
Syria and in parallel Mr President
violence in all theaters of Syria
continues and is even escalating once
again in some respects with alarming
reports of Civilian
casualties just these last few weeks we
have seen escalating violence in
Northwest Syria PR government air
strikes intensified as did Frontline
clashes with very serious incidents of
shelling by by government forces on
idlip intensified Shilling was also
carried out by listed terrorist group
hayat tar Alam and armed opposition
forces including omble and s in
Aleppo further drone attacks on
government areas attributed to hayat T
Alam and other actors based in idlib
which the government says it
intercepted Turkish thr strikes amid
intense artillery exchanges between
Turkish and armed opposition forces on
one side and SDF on the other a
continued trend of attacks by some Arab
tribes on SDF positions in theur and no
reports of government Shilling on SDF
positions too continuing isol attacks in
the Northeast and Central desert region
intensification of clashes between the
Jordanian Army and Smugglers on the
Syrian Jordanian border with several
Jordanian official announcements about
incidents on the border leading to
several casualties among members of the
Jordanian bodyguard forces and ongoing
assassinations and other security
incidents as part of continued
instability in the
southwest Mr President
there is an urgent need for maximum
restraint by All actors syrians and non
syrians no one should delude themselves
that this worrying New Normal of ongoing
escalation is in any way
sustainable any major escalation would
have devastating consequences in a
deeply fragile situation where de facto
authorities and the prisons and actions
of foreign armies are key features of
the
landscape we need to see sustained
deescalation in and on Syria towards a
nationwide ceasefire and a corporative
approach to coning Security Council
listed terrorist groups and we need all
actors to operate in full compliance
with International humanitarian law to
ensure protection of civilians and
civilian
infrastructure Mr
President the socio economic conditions
in Syria are also unsustainable and on
the
brink funding is dwindling while
humanitarian needs are higher than ever
even threatening food security we will
hear more from MAA on this let me issue
here a strong appeal to donors to to
fund all pillars of the UN
response following the expiry of this
council's crossborder resolution we must
continue also to seek solutions to
ensure the continued delivery of
crossborder and crossline humanitarian
assistance meanwhile the economy is in
increasingly dire States due to a wide
range of factories that I have outlined
many times to this Council and we know
the critical infrastructure including
electricity is on the major strain it is
vital to ensure that any adverse effects
of sanctions on ordinary syrians be
avoided and mitigated including
continuous and active efforts by
sanctioning states to conter over
compliance likewise the core concerns
that displaced persons continue to site
namely livelihoods on one hand and
protection issues on the other mean that
refugees and idps have not yet seen
forthcoming conditions for safe
dignified and voluntary
returns nevertheless channels of
dialogue continue as we and our
humanitarian colleagues continue to
assess ser government
announcements Mr
President the challenges on the ground
are symptoms of a conflict that no one
actor or existing group of actors can
solve
alone these challenges cannot be
sustainably addressed without the
political process that make genuine
progress towards a political solution
addressing the issues contained in
Security Council resolution
2254 I had occasion to review the state
of the political process and to stress
the importance of moving the process
forward when I met with the Syrian
Deputy foreign minister in Geneva and
with the president of the Syrian
negotiations Commission in
daa and I carried similar messages to
key stakeholders this month meeting
senior Russians American Iranians Arab
European and Japanese
officials I reminded all that
International cooperation is essential
to get the Syrian political process back
on
track Mr President the blockage of the
Constitution committee for a year and a
half larly over what should be a
secondary issue the venue has sent the
wrong signal and being a
setback despite the non Syrian nature of
this issue I have exerted every effort
to facilitate the solution and I have
appreciated the efforts of others too
however I can confirm from my vde
consultations that there is no venue in
the region that it's both on offer and
attracts consensus and indeed there is
no signs this which change anytime
soon in these circumstances I have been
appealing to all that we should find a
pragmatic Way Forward let us all respect
the Syrian Leed Syrian owned un
facilitated nature of the Constitutional
committee the commitments made by the
Syrian parties when they agreed to
launch the committee namely to a
continuous process process in Geneva
should guide The Way Forward yes we can
continue to explore alternative
consensus locations but in the meantime
we should come together to enable the
reconvening of the Constitutional
Committee in
Geneva let me also remind the council
that proposals for step for step
confidence building measures are on the
table which would benefit all syrians
and give an important political impetus
into the political
process engagement coordination and
information sharing is needed to move
from ambiguous signaling to real
confidence building via coordinated
reciprocal verifiable
actions there are concrete moves that
could be made if we work in this way
my good offices are ongoing with the
Syrian parties the regional players and
the international stakeholders in this
regard Mr President a credible political
process equally depends on the
participation of the Widder spectrum of
syrians in the eight years since the
establishment of the Civil Society
supporter room significant progress has
been made in Syrian Civil Society of
many kinds and perspectives increasingly
working together they are acting as a
source of advice and inspiration and
supporting Grassroots peace building and
humanitarian relief and
advocacy I was extremely pleased to have
an extensive Exchange in a virtual Town
Hall format with over
130 Civil Society support room
participants from all part of Syria
whether currently based inside Syria in
neighboring countries or in the wider
diaspora I was equally pleased to engage
with the Syrian women's Advisory Board
this month they remain very concerned at
the potential for violence spiraling in
the region and the relative lack of
focus on
Syria VB members also engage with
members of the Mediterranean women's
mediators Network and examined ways to
reinforce women's political role across
various context in Syria and the
region Mr President as
2023 draws to a close it seems no
coincident that renewed violence and
popular frustrations including protests
peaked later in the year
this took place at the same time as race
political hopes on different sides were
onmet following various diplomatic moves
and momentum began to
fade this should remind us that the
status quo is
unsustainable and it is unacceptable and
that this conflict cannot be left
unattended it also shows that partially
approaches are unlikely to address the
depths of syrians Despair and contain
the conflict
sustainably in
2024 there is therefore a clear need to
refocus on the political process called
for eight years ago in the resolution
2254 the year ahead needs to see a new
momentum injected into the search for
compromise for a political path forward
I appeal for all to act in a manner that
enables the Constitutional committee to
resume at least initially in Geneva and
for reciprocal verifiable parallel cbms
to be agreed and
implemented equally I remind you all
that these entry points cannot in
themselves resolve the
conflict we must look to engage across a
comprehensive set of issues of concern
to relevant parties with new energy and
new thinking and lay the ground for a
realistic and comprehensive multilateral
approach inclusive of all actors and all
the issues at the heart of the conflict
this is the way to stem the tide of
violence and fast deteriorating soci
economic humanitarian situation and mo
move towards a negotiated political
settlement that could enable the syrians
to realize their legitimate aspirations
and indeed restore Syria sovereignity
Unity Independence and territorial
Integrity in line with security ccil
resolution
2254 thank
you I thank Mr Peterson for his
briefing I now give the floor to to
Madam Lisa
dton thank you Mr
President 2023 is proven to be yet
another challenging year for the people
of of Syria it started with devastating
earthquakes that struck turkey and
Northern and Western Syria killing tens
of thousands of people causing
widespread damage in both countries in
Syria the earthquakes hit when needs
were already at the highest level since
the start of the conflict they affected
close to 9 million people across the
country and killed at least
5,900 Millions were displaced and
countless essential service facilities
were damaged or destroyed the United
Nations and our humanitarian Partners
responded immediately following the
earthquakes we provided first aid and
Trauma care food assistance and shelter
support we provided psychosocial support
and protection programming we supported
the removal of rubble and worked to
urgently restore basic Services however
devast ating and widespread damage to
infrastructure caused by the earthquakes
is still being acutely felt 10 months
later even more so amid the current
economic crisis some 60,000 families
lost their homes while hundreds of
thousands of homes thousands of schools
and hundreds of Health Facilities were
damaged Mr President working with our
partners we've supported the
rehabilitation of hospitals schools
markets roads water lines and other
civilian infrastructure including
through projects financed by ocha's
managed pooled funds here I must
acknowledge the generosity of our donors
who mobilized swiftly and completely
funded the Syria earthquake appeal
however there's much more work to be
done survivors are enduring terrible
trauma while grappling with the material
aftermath of the destruction and our
ability to address the lasting and
increasing needs across the country is
now being severely constrained by a lack
of resources this includes fun for early
recovery initiatives which could address
the suffering caused by earthquakes
while reducing dependence on external
Aid Mr President 2023 sadly saw
hostilities in Northern Syria returned
to levels not seen since
2019 since August the fighting in
Northwest and Northeast Syria has killed
or injured hundreds of civilians it has
forced tens of thousands of people to
endure and many of them in fact to
relive the trauma of
displacement the hostilities have caused
yet further damage to civilian
facilities including critical
infrastructure depriving millions of
people of access to electricity safe
water education and Essential Health
Services I remind all parties to the
conflict that all feasible precautions
must be taken to avoid and minimize
civilian harm this uptick and fighting
reminds us that the conflict in Syria is
far from over for humanitarians it
demonstrates once again that without
progress towards an end to the conflict
it will be impossible to effectively
address the extens of humanitary needs
in the country on any sustainable basis
Mr President against this backdrop
crossb relief operations remain
indispensable Lifeline for more than 4
million people in need in Northwest
Syria agreement by the government of
Syria for the United Nations to use the
babal Hawa Crossing for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance currently runs
until 13 January uary
2024 consent to use bab Al Salam and Al
re Crossings initially granted following
the earthquakes in February was further
extended in November for an additional 3
months until 13 February
2024 Mr President as we've repeatedly
said the sheer scale of needs across the
country underscores the urgency of
scaling up the delivery of Aid via all
modalities the United Nations is
committed to continued engagement to
ensure all three border crossings remain
open in the coming days we will formly
request that the government of Syria
extend its consent for the use of babal
Hawa border crossing for as long as
humanitarian needs persist the United
Nations will also continue to advocate
for sustained and predictable
humanitarian access across Syria through
all possible means whether cross border
or cross line the huge benefits of
increased access will amply were were
amply demonstrated following the Emer
measures introduced by the government of
Syria after the earthquakes these
measures allow the United Nations
agencies to conduct over 300 missions
into Northwest Syria our colleagues were
able to directly engage with affected
populations there conduct needs
assessments and improve the monitoring
of projects and programs through these
missions we're also able to work closely
with women and girls and their Community
Advocates to strengthen our
interventions in response to existing
gender barriers that imped women and
girls access to vital life-saving
Services these missions have been a net
gain resulting in the enhanced overall
efficiency of the humanitarian response
in Northwest Syria and we look forward
to seeing them
continue unfortunately while access
reaps benefits in one place setbacks
challenge us elsewhere United Nations
humanitarian Air Service flights
essential for the transportation of un
personnel and vital temperature
controlled medical cargo have been
suspended since 12 October due to
repeated attacks on Damascus and Aleppo
airports Mr President as I've already
mentioned in relation to the ongoing
earthquake response a lack of funding is
severely constraining our ability to
respond to increasing needs across Syria
two weeks from the end of the year the
2023 humanitarian response plan for
Syria is only 33% funded just $1.8
billion has been received out of the
required $5.4
billion by comparison last year's
response plan was 52%
funded Mr President as we have
repeatedly warned this lack of resources
is severely constraining our ability to
provide critical life-saving assistance
to millions of people in need following
the reductions announced by the world
food program in July which cut food
assistance to some 40% of those
receiving it we saw families increasing
in L resort to negative coping
mechanisms such as drastic reductions in
Daily food intake increased child labor
and growing malnutrition among children
since we last briefed this Council the
world food program has been forced to
announce additional reductions
completely cutting its main food
assistance program which has sustained
millions of families in Syria for over a
decade Mr President starting in January
5.5 million people who benefited from
General food distributions at the
beginning of 2023 will no longer receive
it these new Cuts coming as they do
ammit a deepening economic crisis will
have an even more devastating impact
with deep sadness our preliminary
assessments forecast further declines in
food Security in 2024 including a 29%
increase in severe food insecurity rates
among displaced people living in camps
and informal sites in this context the
consequences of funding shortfalls for
food assistance will be
devastating Mr President the situation
is unsustainable and insupportable as
special Envoy has reminded us again
today urgent progress must be made
toward peace if the people of Syria are
to have any hope for a better future let
2024 be the year in which genuine
progress is made in the meantime we must
all redouble our efforts to keep the
people of Syria and their hopes alive
our ask has been consistent we need
civilians and civilian infrastructure to
be protected we need sustained
humanitarian access throughout the
country through all modalities and we
need urgent and adequate funding to
sustain the life-saving humanitarian
response thank you Mr
President I thank um Mrs dton for her
briefing I now give the floor to those
council members who wish to make
statements I give the floor floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation
SP thank you Mr
President we wish to thank the special
Envoy of the Secretary General for Syria
G Peterson as well as the director for
the humanitarian financing and resource
mobilization division of un Ocha Madame
doten for their overview of the
political humanitarian situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic the unprecedented
toll of casualties of the escalation in
the Palestine Israel conflict Zone
has provoked additional tensions in the
friendly country of Syria against the
backdrop of Israel's brutal military
operation in the Gaza Strip and the
ongoing armed raids on the West Bank of
the Jordan River we have observed a
stark increase in various forces and
units presence in the region they are
increasing flights of the Israeli Air
Force targeting Syrian objects first and
foremost the airports in Damascus and
Aleppo which are used as the main
gateways for the introduction into Sy of
un humanitarian assistance as well as
the heightened
hostilities and an exchange of strikes
on the blue line between Lebanon and
Israel uh carry are fraught with risks
of dragging Syria into a full-blown
Regional confrontation this needs to be
avoided at all costs at the same time in
the country the existing difficulties in
the country persist and are worsening
the terrorist hotbed in Libya
hostilities between the Kurds and prot
Turkish groups instability in the South
including the Aton area zone which is
under the US control we would note that
in the context of the situation in Gaza
Strip our us colleagues are actively
exploiting the premises on self-defense
premises of self-defense and countering
the threat of terrorism unjustifiably
asserting that this right is something
which not only Israel enjoys Israel
occupying power in Palestine but also
Washington and its allies they assert
enjoy this right they illegit who have
an illegit illegitimately occupi part of
Syrian territory allegedly under under
the pretext of countering isil and
Al-Qaeda at the same time the US is
obstinately denying Damascus both the
right to counter Security Council listed
HTS terrorists in idlib and the right to
self-defense from indiscriminate Israeli
attacks under these
circumstances what is the the of our
Western colleagues is deafening they
cannot fail to understand the risks
which directly emanate from such
Reckless acts we firmly condemn the uh
the uh uh the ongoing strikes targeting
Syria as egregious violations of Syrian
sovereignty and the basic provisions of
international law including
International humanitarian law in the
context of the advancement of Syrian
political settlement through security
Council resolution
2254 we consistently unwaveringly
support the resumption of the continuous
work of the Constitutional committee
under with the mediation of the United
Nations support for this has also been
ex voiced in the F outcome of the Su
session of the Russian Arab
cooperation Summit at the level of
Foreign Affairs which completed its work
in maresh Morocco in it it's there is
mention is made of this of the desire to
resume work on the Syrian constitutional
track with assistance from the United
nations in this connection we trust that
you Mr Peterson will provide assistance
to the Syrian parties to find new
mutually acceptable platforms for the
Constitutional
committee without at the same time
dispersing efforts in other areas which
are not supported by the syrians
themselves Mr President we continue to
be persuaded of the need to uphold the
basic right of the Syrian refugees to
return as is stipulated under security
Council resolution
2254 under the strict condition that
these efforts are coordinated with
Damascus in this connection we wish to
note the decree the order of the Syrian
president Bashar alassad dating 16
November on the general amnesty for the
citizens of the country this decision
was made by the leadership of the syan
Arab Republic and this in Connection in
addition to the 22 2022 amnesty is
designed to facilitate the return of
syan refugees to their homes furthermore
the syan government has demonstrated a
willingness to take concrete measures to
facilitate civilian reconciliation
working on the detained and missing
persons track thereby facilitating
implementation of Security Council
resolution
2254 in the above mentioned final uh
Declaration of the succession of the
Russian Arab cooperation for at the
foreign Minister's level mention is also
made of the importance of surmounting
the the refugee crisis and its
consequences which the Syrian people
themselves are facing as well as the
host countries uh accommodating them
also noted as they need to strengthen
cooperation between the Syrian
government and the states hosting
refugees in order to AV alleviate the
process of the voluntary dignified and
safe return to their homes and an end to
their plight in coordination with the
relevant United Nations
agencies distinguished colleagues in the
same doc doent and the importance is
noted of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all Syrian regions without
any politicization
whatsoever however with respect to the
humanitarian situation in Syria the
reasons for our alarm are only
growing the situation is viewed
similarly by humanitarian Personnel
working in that country the dir of
appropriate financing the political
conditions established for donor
contributions the sanctions pressure by
Western countries and on the whole the
exceedingly politicized approach to
humanitarian operations in this Arab
country has resulted in the fact that
the situation on the ground is swiftly
deteriorating we urge the UN country
team in Damascus to devise a more
effective approach to the delivery of
assistance to syrians in need within all
regions of the country without any
discrimination whatsoever now the
resident coordinator is called upon to
demonstrate political will and to submit
a report on the negative influence of
unilateral sanctions on the situation in
that country to that end there's a
mandate from the second committee
resolution which the general assembly
approved the day before yesterday on 19
December well there are instructions to
monitor the negative consequences of
sanctions and these apply to the whole
country team including
Ocha what should long ago have been
rescinded what should long ago have been
rescinded is the internal secretary Mar
manual on the parameters and principles
for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to Syria which directly links
the conduct of recovery efforts in the
country to progress on the political
track this is nothing other than the UN
Secretariat directly catering to Western
anti-syrian preferences which casts a
shadow on the impartiality requirement
for all un staff which is enshrined in
the charter Mr President the Syrian
government extended on 10 November the
permission for the UN to use the bab
assalam and RI crossb points for another
3 months that is until 13 February 2024
on the 13th of January 2024 the
temporary permission for the United
Nations to use the babalwa checkpoint
will expire the fate of this is The
Sovereign decision of Damascus a
decision taken as part of bilateral
dialogue between the Syrian government
and the UN in any event we believe that
the humanitarian potential of the
babalwa checkpoint should not be used by
un Personnel from the office in
gaziantep for spontaneous visits to ilb
which are not agreed upon with Damascus
Ocha should be strictly accountable
before the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic on this question we are
aware that the UN is planning before the
end of the year to finally send two
Northwestern regions in Syria the first
since the non-extension of Security
Council 7 267 to the first humanitarian
Convoy through the line of contact we
trust that this operation will be a
success for regardless of what some may
attempt to assert the humanitarian needs
in regions not under damascus's control
in this part of the country remain high
on the whole it behooves us to note that
the crossline Convoy mechanisms which
our Western and secretari colleagues do
not uh the need for which our Western
and secretary colleagues have not uh
disputed continues not to work we see no
particular Zeal in working with those
who fainthearted are called authorities
on the ground in order to address this
absolutely inacceptable unacceptable
situation undermining the premise that
assistance to syrians in ilib needs to
be delivered to in all using all
possible means this brings us to the
clear conclusion that the suffering of
the syan people like the suffering of
the people in Gaza is something which
our Western colleagues have no concern
about whatsoever all they care about are
geopolitical games and support for their
clients in the region regardless of what
crimes they may perpetrate thank
you I thank the Russian
Federation I now give the floor to the
United States thank you Mr President and
thank you special Envoy Pon and director
dton uh for your sobering
briefings as 2023 comes to a close the
Syrian political process remains
frustratingly blocked and the Syrian
people are suffering
greatly this Council continues to
rightly discuss the political and
humanitarian files each month yet we
have few results to show for our work
for more than 12 years the Assad regime
has waged a brutal war against the
Syrian people on top of that syrians are
still reeling from the devastating
impacts of February's earthquakes
yet rather than engage in a political
process in the last few months the Assad
regime has stepped up its attacks on its
own people in the northwest of
Syria we all know the responsibility for
this war lies at the feet of the Assad
regime the Searing images and accounts
of the regime's chemical weapons attacks
on opposition-led suburbs of demascus
will never fade from our
conscience nor will we forget the
widespread shelling in Ms massacres in
Aleppo and the present-- day bombardment
that is killing civilians in
idlib just two days ago the general
assembly voted on a US co-facilitated
resolution on the human rights situation
in Syria that reminded the world of the
abuses the regime wants us to forget the
use of chemical weapons extrajudicial
killings torture and other ill treatment
unjust attentions enforced
disappearances and gender based
violence we joined the majority of UN
member states in reiterating the call
for the Syrian regime to immediately
release all those arbitrarily held and
to provide information about the tens of
thousands who are
missing we are alarmed by the reports
that violence has reached its worst
level since
2019 the hundreds of Civilian deaths
caused by the regime and Russian
offensive in idlib are deeply
concerning the destruction they have
caused to infrastructure
and the threats they pose to
humanitarian operations put hundreds of
thousands of people at risk during the
cold winter
months while we welcome the three-month
extension of the un's arrangement with
the regime for Access through babal
Salam and alai Crossings to access areas
in need in Northwest Syria we also
underscore that this peac meal approach
does not fully meet the Urgent
humanitarian
need we continue to underscore the
importance of PR ictable sustainable
access particularly to improve
efficiencies and allow for sufficient
Staffing and
planning we note that discussions
between the UN and the regime regarding
renewed crossb access through the
crucial Crossing at Babble Hawa
continue we support under Secretary
General Griffith's efforts in this
regard and remain hopeful for a positive
outcome as Brazil prepares to conclude
its Council term we want to acknowledge
the close collaboration of the
humanitarian pen ERS Brazil and
Switzerland to focus the council's work
on the needs of the Syrian people and we
look forward to continued reporting to
the council and close attention to this
file as we appeal for Comm in Syria we
also reiterate our condemnation of
attacks by Iranian Allied militia groups
on us personnel and facilities in Iraq
and
Syria the United States has responded in
self-defense and we reiterate that these
attacks by Iranian align groups must
stop
special ano Pon we share your concerns
about Regional
spillover it is in these moments that we
must persevere and remain committed to
achieving a Syrian focused and
syrian-led solution to the conflict in
line with resolution 2254 the only
viable road map for a lasting solution
to the
conflict more than eight years have pass
since this Council unanimously adopted
that
resolution it is incumbent on all
countries seated at this table to do
their part and help Implement all
aspects of this
resolution the Syrian people have been
waiting far too long we support the
special Envoy efforts to advance the
political process and to reconvene the
Constitutional committee as soon as
possible the United States is closely
following the popular protests in SOA
just as we did when pro-democracy
demonstrations first sprung up in the
nearby city of dar in
2011 the Syrian people deserve the
future for which they have fought so
hard including respect for their human
rights and fundamental freedoms thank
you Mr
President I thank the United States for
statement and I now give the floor to
the representative of Switzerland I
speak on behalf of Switzerland and
Brazil Coen holders of the Syrian
humanitarian file we thank special Envoy
G pedison and AA director for the
humanitarian finance and resource
mobilization division Lisa dorton for
their briefings we also acknowledge the
presence of representatives from Syria
turkey and Iran in today's
meeting this is the last joint statement
together with Brazil before our very
esteemed copenh holder partner concludes
its term on the council we would like to
thank them for the excellent cooperation
throughout we will miss you and use this
opportunity to both look back at this
year and towards future
developments as we are all aware in 2023
the people of Syria have experienced
severe hardship the earthquake with its
epicenter in turkey has heavily affected
Northern Syria people lost their homes
families and community members in a
matter of minutes at least 6,000 people
were killed with many more injured and
thousands of Bill buildings have been
destroyed this has led to further
deteriorations of the already dire
humanitarian situation the number of out
of school children grew by at least
25% inadequate sanitary infrastructures
in makeshift camps for internally
displaced persons and the lasting
extreme draft and water scarcity
facilitated the spread of the colera
outbreak across most of Syria the large
scale vaccination campaign by the UN has
been helpful to transform to
transforming Coler cases into milder
more manageable infections however it
Still Remains a concern at the same time
food insecurity keeps rising and cases
of severe malnutrition are increasingly
reported especially with children and we
just heard it yet due to lack of funds
the world food program had to reduce
drastically rations since the summer
while in 2024 the number of
beneficiaries will be significantly
reduced these reductions risk having
consequences on access to other basic
Services as people will have to
prioritize and leading to increased
negative coping mechanisms such as child
labor or early manage early marriage
sorry the worrying increase in violence
and attacks in the Northeast and
Northwest of the country since October
has caused internal displacement cost
lives and significantly damaged civilian
infrastructure furthermore repeated air
strikes under the two main airports of
the country have disrupted un
humanitarian Aid flights hampering
severely the transports of humanitarian
goods and personel we recall that
International humanitarian law must be
respected by all parties and the
protection of civilians must be ensured
at all times moreover the crossborder
mechanism of Aid delivery went through a
major shift this year following the
devastations of the earthquake Syria has
agreed to open the Babel salamand ALR
border crossings in order to facilitate
the emergency response the time bound
authorization has been renewed until 13
February in July the authorization for
the UN to operate the babble how crossb
Aid mechanism from Turkey to Northwest
Syria transitioned from a security
Council mandate to a consent-based
Arrangement which is set to expire on
133 January in the middle of harsh
winter conditions we trust that all of
the authorizations will be renewed
without conditions and time limit as a
Lifeline for millions of people depend
on those parties must allow and
facilitate humanitarian access to all
people in need this is an obligation
under International humanitarian law all
access mod modalities are necessary
including cross border and cross line to
support people in need across Syria we
further hope that sufficient funding of
the humanitarian response will be
ensured so that life- saving assistance
as well as early recovery projects can
be ured in order to prevent that this
Grim retrospection transforms into an
even Bleaker outlook for 2024 the
International Community has a
responsibility to act a political
solution in line with resolution
2254 is urgently needed in the midst of
the turmoil in Gaza with its Regional
implications the security Council must
not forget the plight of the Syrian
people Mr President let me conclude with
expressing our appreciation to the
United Nations as well as its partner
organizations for their tireless work
and efforts in serving the people in
need in Syria along with colera
vaccination campaigns delivery of
humanitarian items food rations Water
Sanitation health and Protection
Services cash and voucher assistance and
so much more these humanitarian actors
help avert the humanitarian crisis to
deepen even more and provide
much needed hope to the people we need
to ensure the context for a safe and
efficient implementation of their work
building on our role on the council with
Brazil so far Switzerland is committed
to keep the council's continued
attention on the humanitarian situation
in Syria I thank
you Mr President I would now like to
make a statement of my national capacity
on the political situation in Syria as
2023 draws to a close Switzerland can
look back on a pivotal year for Syria
the earthquakes of 6 February which
shook a country already devastated by
War revived welcome Regional diplomatic
efforts under the egis of the league of
Arab
states these diplomatic efforts seem to
have stalled and we can only regret this
the current political status
quo coupled with the renewed intensity
of the conflict is of great concern to
us we are also concerned about the
serious risk of a major regional
escalation into which Syria could be
drawn we must avoid the situation at all
costs we wish to point out that the
solutions to the conflict in Syria are
known they're contained in resolution
2254 which the council adopted precisely
8 years ago at a time of great Regional
tension its implementation is
particularly urgent in addition to a
national ceasefire multifaceted
commitment is needed this includes
resuming the work of the Constitutional
Committee in this respect we regret the
lack of significant progress and urge
all parties
concerned to commit themselves in good
faith and to collaborate with a special
Envoy whom we thank for his efforts to
relaunch such a
process Switzerland remains ready to
make Geneva available to host the
meetings of this committee as well as
any other type of talks and
initiatives aimed at promoting a lasting
peace in Syria Miss Mr President in the
view of the tragic human toll of the
past year we once again call on all
parties to establish a nationwide
ceasefire and to ensure the protection
of
civilians it is essential that all
parties respect and en and ensure
respect for international humanitarian
law in particular the principles of
Distinction proportionality and
precaution in the conduct of
hostilities it is imperative that the
civilian population and civilian objects
including INF structure indispensable to
the survival of the population be
protected this Council must make this
its priority the Syrian population
desperately needs this for its part
Switzerland will spare no effort
Switzerland would like to pay tribute to
the remarkable commitment of Syrian
Civil Society these organizations play a
crucial role in easing
tensions and bringing about National
reconciliation like the international
impartial and independent mechanism
they play an important role in
documenting International crimes which
is essential in the fight against
impunity their work is therefore
fundamental to achieving lasting peace
we would like to reaffirm our full
support for them and stress the need to
provide them with the resources they
need to carry out their work thank
you I thank the representative
Switzerland for her
statement I now give the floor to Ghana
France I'm sorry France
okay thank you Mr President I wish to
thank gar Peterson as well as Lisa
Dalton for their statements I wish to
highlight two points absent of a
political prospect there can be no
lasting and fair peace in Syria nor can
there be stability within the Region 8
years ago the security Council
unanimously adopted res resolution 2254
which called for the establishment of a
credible and inclusive political process
in Syria we are far from having achieved
sufficient progress due to the
intransigence of the regime and its
refusal to make the slightest concession
human rights violations continue to
remain rif frequently there is complete
impunity for this and political demands
are ongoing violations against the
Syrian people are ongoing the
bombardment of the regime and supporters
in the Northwest in Syria are an
unfortunate example of this this is
permanent instability and captagon
trafficking is another manifestation
thereof which represents a threat to the
region the conditions for the voluntary
safe dignified return for refugees to
the country have not been met uh
Damascus has not made any concrete
commitments to that end we reiterate our
support for the countries that host
these thousands of syrians under these
circumstances guy Peterson's mediation
is critical because much yet needs to be
done and in this regard I would recall
France's support for Mr Peterson's
efforts there is a vital need to keep
our attention and Collective efforts
focused on a political solution to the
crisis in Syria at a time uh when the
war in Gaza shows that a crisis that is
considered to be frozen can ultimately
erupt if the root causes are not
addressed the humanitarian situation is
also worsening the resumption of
hostilities in the Northwest and
Northeast have compounded the tremendous
suffering of civilians who have not been
spared in any way this year France is
also particularly concerned at Food
instability as we approach winter
there's a vital need for more donors to
be able to mobilize to deliver
assistance to Syria in this particularly
Grim context International humanitarian
law needs to be upheld by all parties in
Syria there is a particular need to
guarantee access for humanitarian
assistance in a secure predictable and
transparent way
and there's a need to ensure the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel
as the authorization for the United
Nations to use the babal Hawa checkpoint
is set to expire on the 13th of January
we urge the Syrian regime to renew this
authorization without a Time limitation
the use of additional checkpoints and
Crossing points should also cont uh be
considered uh there's a vital need for
the council to remain seize of the
matter for the secretari to provide
written reports on the humanitarian
response in Syria thank you I thank
friends and give the Flor to Ghana Mr
President I have the honor to deliver
this joint statement on behalf of the
African members of the security Council
we thank special Envoy G pson and
director Lisa Dalton for their briefings
and welcome the participation of the
representatives of the Syrian Arab
Republic the Islamic Republic of Iran
and to key in this meeting
the humanitarian crisis in Syria has
continued to maintain its downward
trajectory with an overwhelming number
of syrians requiring various forms of
assistance as we heard again today
unfortunately children and displaced
people are bearing the brand of the
country's acute and Rising food security
crisis at the same time Necessities such
as water and electricity and in short
supply with Millions having to live
without them added to the economic
challenges cuts to humanitarian support
due to funding shortfalls and the wanton
destruction of agricultural
infrastructure resulting from the
prolonged conflict has created a crisis
within a
crisis the abset in violence in parts of
the country has wed the protection
concerns as thousands of civilians
remain displaced and are unable to
safely and
voluntarily return to their homes women
and girls have been particularly
vulnerable under such
circumstances as they are exposed to
gender-based violence in displacement
camps consequently the daily lives of
Syrian women and girls are mared by
gender-based violence early and forced
marriage and characterized by limited
opportunities and
resources Mr President IIT this an
ending crisis funding shortages persist
with these Year's humanitarian response
plan requ in the lowest
contributions of 33% in the past 3 years
the low funding has constrained Aid
agencies ability to provide the needed
support to vulnerable
populations we reiterate our appeal to
the International Community to support
the humanitarian cause in the country to
ease the human suffering in
Syria in view of the D nature of the
humanitarian situation the A3 pledges
its full support for any mode of Aid
delivery that helps the most vulnerable
people we urge the parties to
collaborate closely with the United
Nations to create a safe and secure
environment for unhindered delivery of
humanitarian Aid through all
modalities given the substantial number
of beneficiaries of the crossb aid
delivery mechanism the A3 edges the
Syrian national government to renew the
authorization for the use of the bab
alwa border crossing before its
expiration in January
2024 this is vital to maintain an
uninterrupted supply of life- saving
assistance in the area despite the
broader scope of this delivery system
the A3 is of the view that a
distribution across the front lines is
equally important and should be expanded
to complement the crossb
supplies Mr President it is regrettable
that the political situation in Syria
continues to distate not with standing
International and Regional efforts to
find a lasting solution to the conflict
the Arab Spring that had renewed hope of
a new dawn of democracy in Syria has
failed to deliver on the aspirations of
the
youth instead Syria is still marked by
political instability and violence with
devastating consequences for civilian
lives and
wellbeing Rising military hostilities in
the country in recent times without
regard to safeguarding civilian lives is
deepening the crisis we remind the
parties of their obligations under
International humanitarian law to
protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure all parties must exercise
maximum restraint and take proactive
steps towards de
escalations the parties involved must
remember that no group can win the in
the midst of such a constant blast
shed a nationwide ceasefire remains s
quanon for the start of the political
process in accordance with resolution
4 the most workable solution to the
conflict remains a Syrian Le and Syrian
owned inclusive political process
undertaken with the support of the
International Community under the ages
of the United
Nations in this regard the role of the
United Nation special Envoy G pison
remains critical if the political
process is to crystalize into a tangible
outcome that brings resite and restore
the hopes of all
syrians genuine commitment to the peace
process and support of the parties to
his efforts including the step for step
confidence building measures will go a
long way to ensure peaceful resolution
of the
conflict reconvening the meeting of the
small body of the Constitutional
committee with active participation of
all parties will give impetus to the
political process we therefore call for
broad consensus behind the proposal of
the special Envoy for prompt resumption
of the meetings of the committee without
further delay
Mr President the A3 welcomes the report
of the Secretary General on the
implementation of the resolution on the
establishment of the independent
institution on missing persons in the
Syrian Arab Republic we call for full
cooperation of all stakeholders to help
address the plight of the detained and
missing the families of the victims know
deserve to know the fate of their loved
ones in concluding the A3 Retreats its
Collective call for a nation
ceasefire and the immediate resumption
of negotiations among the parties
towards a political settlement that
brings comprehensive and Lasting peace
and stability to Syria in line with
resolution
2254 of
2015 even as a term of Ghana and Gabon
on the council ends we assure the people
of Syria of our continuing solidarity
with them in their Quest for Peace and
security I thank you for your
attention I thank Gana for your
statement I give the FL to
China Mr
President I thank special Envoy Pon and
director Dalton for their briefings
currently the neighboring environment of
Syria continues to deteriorate and the
spill over it risks of the Palestinian
Israeli situation continues to
accumulate which have had some a complex
impact on the situation in Syria
recently multiple occasion in Syria
including the Damascus Airport suffered
frequent air strikes China is deeply
concerned about
this we call upon all relevant parties
to stay calm and exercise restraint
refrain from any actions that may
escalate tensions and spare no effort to
reduce the risks for regional security
the International Community in
particular a major country should play a
constructive role in preventing the
spread of the conf conflict the Urgent
priority is to stop all illegal military
operations in Syria and end illegal
military presence in the
country political settlement is the
fundamental way out for the Syrian issue
China supports the Syrian Le and Syrian
owned political process and calls upon
all Syrian parties to enhance dialogue
and work for substantive progress in the
work of the Constitutional committee we
welcome
the extensive engagement by special
Envoy Patterson with all parties on the
implementation of resolution
2254 and expect Arab countries to step
up coordination and facilitate the
political settlement of the Syrian
issue the counterterrorism situation in
Syria remains complex and dire we
support the Syrian government in taking
necessary measures to combat terrorism
and Safeguard the country's security and
stability and in in strengthening
counterterrorism capacity building the
International Community should fight all
terrorism in Syria with zero
tolerance Mr
President China has always supported the
UN in maintaining positive interactions
with the Syrian government and
effectively implementing the new
arrangement for crossb humanitarian
assistance on the basis of fully
respecting Syria's sovereignty and the
ownership of the Syrian government in
recent years un humanitarian funding for
Syria has continued to decline over
which we have expressed concerns
multiple times the relevant donors
should earnestly fulfill their
commitments and effectively meet the
humanitarian needs of the Syrian people
it needs to be pointed out that
unilateral sanctions and resource
plundering have long hindered the
recovery and development of Syria's
economy and society and aggravated the
humanitarian challenges facing the
country we
urge the relevant parties to immediately
and unconditionally end these illegal
actions thank you
[Music]
president I thank China for your
statement and I'll give Au to the United
Kingdom uh thank you president and thank
you to special Envoy pedon and director
Dalton for their their
briefings president today in our our
final session of the year on item we
should reflect on the situation in Syria
over the last 12
months 12 months in which there has been
no progress on the political process no
improvement in civil or political rights
for syrians or on arbitrary detentions
no improvement in the conditions to
enable the safe voluntary and dignified
return of
refugees the humanitarian crisis has
deepened and the capan trade has only
grown as we enter the new year here we
believe there are three areas where the
council can meaningfully
focus first the threat posed to the
region from actors within Syria remains
of grave concern we are particularly
concerned by the continuing attacks
against the global Coalition against
asesh in Northeast Syria the increasing
tensions along the Jordanian Syrian
border and the reported strikes into
Israeli territory by Assad regime and
Iranian affiliation
forces Regional escalation serves
nobody's
interest second un humanitarian access
at babal Hower remains vital over three
quarters of all un Aid transits via this
Crossing and it remains a critical
Lifeline for 4.1 million
syrians the Syrian regime's current
permissions expire on 13th of Janu
January we fully expect them to be
renewed crossline operations can
complement but not replace the essential
support which crossborder mechanisms
provide finally we need to continue to
support the UN special Envoy in his
efforts to convene a meeting of the
Constitutional committee as soon as
possible in the New
Year Mr President 18th of December
marked eight years since this Council
unan unanimously adopted resolution
2254 as we have said many times
implementation of this resolution
Remains the only way to end this
conflict and provide sustainable peace
and stability to the Syrian people thank
you I thank the United Kingdom for a
statement and I now give the floor to
Brazil thank you Mr President Brazil
aligns itself with the statement made by
Switzerland in our capacity as cope and
holders of the Syrian humanitarian file
we also thank special invoy gar p
and director Lisa Dolton for their
briefings I will now speak in my
national capacity on the political
aspects of the conflict but first I
would like to express our sincere
appreciation for the very constructive
partnership we have had with Switzerland
in facilitating the council's
discussions on this file during a
challenging year for Syria and the
region as for the council as well Mr
President 2023 marks a year of change in
the doer notably being the first in many
years without a resolution on
crossborder assistance despite the
Intensive negotiating process led by the
copen holders Brazil and
Switzerland currently three Crossing
points are being used to deliver Aid to
those in need with the consent of the
Syrian government we welcome this
important moment of cooperation between
Syria and the humanitarian Community
coordinated by
and hope that it continues to move in
the right direction for the benefit of
the Syrian people and the future of the
country the un's role in Aid delivery
remains vital especially as a rising
number of syrians depend on humanitarian
assistance Mr President in recent months
we have witnessed an escalation of
violence in Syria and the region the
situation in Northern Syria has worsened
in the Northwest there have been reports
of air strikes resulting in civilian
casualties and significant damage to
civilian
infrastructure these include attacks by
the security Council designated
terrorist group hayat Tahir arsham there
have been disturbing reports of violence
in the Northeast including attacks on
civilian infrastructure humanitarian law
must be respected civilians and civilian
property must be protected during
hostilities
Syria has been repeatedly affected by
the current escalation of the conflict
in Israel and Palestine strikes on Alo
and Damascus airports have disrupted
unhas flights on more than one occasion
the risk of regional escalation is real
and deeply
worried in the midst of this growing
instability we urge all parties to
exercise maximum restraint we emphasize
the need to respect the sovereignty and
territor Integrity of Syria in
accordance with international law and
the resolutions of this
Council Brazil has consistently
maintained that there is no military
solution to the Syrian conflict given
the escalating humanitarian crisis and
deteriorating security conditions in
Syria an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire is urgently needed we are
grateful to special Envoy G pson for his
continuous efforts to reengage engage
key stakeholders in the search for a
solution to the current stalemate in the
political
process being so legitimately proud of
its vast community of Syrian descent
Brazil follows closely the situation in
the country and fully shares the
secretary General's assessment that
quote nothing would do more to alleviate
the suffering in Alleviate the suffering
in in Syria then and steam the tide of
humanitarian needs than an inclusive
comprehensive and sustainable political
solution to end the conflict consistent
with Security Council resolution
2015 end quote diplomacy and genu
genuine political will must be given
every opportunity to succeed that is not
only hope but also work diligently
towards a political outcome for Syria
that will ultimate ately bring the peace
stability and Reconciliation so desired
by the Syrian people thank
you I thank the representative of Brazil
and I now give the floor to
Japan uh thank you
president first I thank special enoy uh
Pon and OA director Miss dorden for
their variable briefings Mr President we
remain deeply concerned about the risk
that the conflict in Gaza could escalate
and expand across the region the
security situation in Syria is already
Fragile with sporadic crashes between
Israel and Syria in Gan Heights Israel
air strikes including on including on
Syria's international airports ongoing
hostilities in the north and various
military crashes involving ISO and other
Islamic resistance groups OA notes that
the humanitarian impact of recent
hostilities in the
Northwest is the highest since
2019 any misjudgment could lead to a new
large scale military conflict all
parties concerned must exercise ma
maximum restraint to avoid
this clearly there is a need to refocus
the political process to address the
root causes of Syrian crisis which have
long been ignored
in this vein we highly appreciate
special enoy penson's active diplomacy
based on a stepbystep
approach but unfortunately the prospects
for reconvening the Constitutional
committee which remains an important
aspect of political process based on
resolution
2254 remain remain
them even as the International Community
focuses on Gaza conflict the importance
of supporting Syrian red and Syrian
owned dialogue should not should not
diminish all parties must overcome their
differences as soon as possible
including on the issue of the venue of
the
committee Mr President the humanitarian
situation remains alarming and is
worsening based on the Syrian
government's decision cross border a
through three border crossings have
become a Lifeline for than 4 million
people in the
Northwest in particular barara border
crossing crossing is vital and must
remain open we also note the TW 12th
round of crossline assistance is being
imp planed by the end of this year yet
OA warns that the low level of funding
is unprecedented for humanitarian CR
crisis of this scale with this in mind
Japan has recently decided to provide
approximately 32.6 million Us in
addition additional humanitarian
assistance to Syria which includes the
AIDS for Syrian neighboring countries
and we call on other donors to do the
same Mr President regarding the refugees
and internally displaced persons in
Syria we are deeply concerned the
conditions for safe dignified and
voluntary returns do not currently exist
furthermore it is urgent to address the
issue of missing persons in this regard
we welcome the recent report of the
Secretary General on progress towards
the full functioning of the independent
institution on missing persons
authorized by the UN General Assembly in
June Japan will support this institution
as it moves to begin substantive work in
the near
future as the year as the year end is
approaching we express our sincere
gratitude to Brazil for its role as a
Syrian humanitarian copen holder
together with
Switzerland we would like to stress
Japan's commitment to continue
addressing the Syrian crisis together
with the council with with the council
including five new members thank you Mr
President I thank Japan for your
statement and I give the floor to the
United Arab
Emirates
say Mr President I thank Mr gear
Peterson and Miss Dalton for their
briefings
today as this is our last meeting on the
Syrian political and humanitarian file
during the UAE term at the security
Council allow me to share a few of our
thoughts on this
file since 2014 the main focus of this
Council has been to meet the needs of
the Syrian people by establishing the
crossborder mechanism to Syria and
renewing it on a regular
basis which has contributed to providing
relief Aid to millions of
syrians however we have noticed during
our 2-year term on the security Council
that the political track has not
received similar attention by the
council this is despite the fact that
reaching a peaceful solution is
necessary to address the humanitarian
crisis in a suitable manner while Aid
continues to flow through the three
Crossings Babel Hawa Babel Salam and
aray with the approval of the Syrian
government and the efforts of the UN and
humanitarian workers on the
ground the security Council should
simultaneously intensify its work on the
political track and support the efforts
of the special Envoy for Syria to reach
a peaceful solution as the only means to
end the suffering of the Syrian people
and to restore security and stability in
Syria and the broader
region over the past several years the
political track has not seen any
concrete progress towards ending the
Syrian crisis meanwhile the humanitarian
and economic conditions have continued
to deteriorate to unprecedented levels
today there are more than 15 million
syrians in need of humanitarian
Aid the current situation requires the
security Council to
allocate the same level of attention to
the Syrian crisis as it does to other
crises on its agenda there's no doubt
that ending the Syrian crisis will
contribute to resolving one of its most
serious consequences the displacement
crisis today there are about 7 million
displaced
syrians this requires providing
appropriate living conditions for the
voluntary dignified and safe return of
refugees and displaced persons including
through the implementation of early
recovery
projects while we stress the importance
the important work work of the
Constitutional committee enhancing
dialogue between the Syrian parties to
end the crisis through a Syrian Le and
Syrian owned process without any foreign
interference we believe that merely
holding meetings is not sufficient the
political path extends beyond that and
it requires all diplomatic efforts to be
focused on resolving the Syrian crisis
rather than only managing
it
also these efforts are necessary to
address security conditions in Syria
which will worsen if there's no
political Solution on the
horizon we have closely monitored with
concern the violent escalation in the
northwest of Syria along the Syrian
borders and across many other regions in
Syria this reaffirms the need to
continue working towards deescalation
and a ceasefire throughout all Syrian
regions this issue has become
particularly urgent in light of the
escalating tensions in our
region the conditions in Syria does not
cannot afford any more escalation in
closing Mr
President we look forward to the day
when Syria turns the page on conflict
and regains its security and stability
the Syrian
people have an ancient civilization they
deserve to lead better lives and a
future with dignity on their Homeland as
we have always known them over
as has long been the case the UAE will
continue to support Regional
International efforts aimed at realizing
these objectives I thank
you I thank the representative of United
Arab Emirates and I give the floor to
Malta president let me Begin by thanking
special Envoy pedon and director dorton
for their briefings today in
2023 syrians faced the greatest level of
humanitarian need since the beginning of
this 13-year-old conflict as we come to
the end of the year your Som Reflections
remind us that next year must be
better president over the past 12 months
syrians have had to contend with the
impact of multiple divor ing earthquakes
and aftershocks a humanitarian crisis
climate shocks and now major conflict on
their border which threatens to bring
even greater violence and turmoil to the
region despite these compounding
political and humanitarian crisis
syrians remain dignified and resilient
losing neither hope nor their voice in
demanding a just end to this brutal
conflict we commend the United Nations
especially Ocha for their diligent work
throughout the this year we thank them
for their efforts in engaging with the
parties to ensure the free flow and
facilitation of humanitarian assistance
both within Syria but also across
borders at a time when it was needed
most the continued functioning of The
Crossings at babal Salam and alai has
greatly supported the a delivery
mechanism at babal Hawa a Crossing which
remains a Lifeline to millions in the
Northwest
today we expect that once again the
agreement for the use of babal Hawa by
the UN and its humanitarian Partners
will be extended before its expiration
in mid January and that all Aid delivery
modalities will remain in place as long
as they are needed president violence
has continued unabated in the north of
the country protests have erupted in the
South and seran airports remain subject
to routine air strikes grave violations
of children's rights remain a major
concern to Malta especially with a
record number of children internally
displaced as we have heard throughout
this year the roots of these
humanitarian needs in Syria are
political without adequate even modest
progress on the political front we will
be unable to progress towards a just
lasting and deserved peace the stalling
of the precious political momentum seen
in the weeks directly after the
earthquakes is deeply
regrettable in such a context of deadly
fragility
the burden of political inaction is
borne by the people of
Syria those who continue to suffer and
face daily
indignities the burden is ever
increasing with the cost of basic
Commodities at an all high at an all
time high and the humanitarian
assistance at an alltime low as We Have
Heard on many occasions here in this
chamber shortages of these Essentials
make women and girls more vulnerable in
poverty violence and
exploitation President we regret that
despite extensive efforts by the special
Envoy we have been unable to see the
reconvening of the Constitutional
committee and steps for steps has yet to
deliver the much needed confidence
required to tackle the many pressing
issues facing Syria we once again call
for a nationwide ceas fire to help
create the conditions for progress in
line with with resolution
2254 13 years of fighting should should
indicate that there is no military
solution to this conflict an inclusive
political process is the only way
forward president as we enter 2024 we
must neither become complacent nor numb
to the challenges and suffering of those
in Syria we must again redouble our
political and humanitarian efforts to
make sure sir's future does not mirror
its present I thank
you
thank I thank Malta for your statement I
give the floor to the representative of
Albania thank you
president at the outset allow me to
thank special Envoy Pon and OA
representative director Doon for their
insights also I would like to extend
Albania's full support for your good
offices special invo
Pon the magnitude of destrction as
described described Once More Today by
many has turned ser Syria into wreckage
the rate of violence in the Northwest
due to the governmental attacks and air
strikes in it lip is the highest in
three years and the humanitarian needs
are larger than ever considering the
situation in the region we Echo the call
of the special invoy for maximum
restrain the escalation in respect of
the nation white ceasefire and in full
compliance with International
humanitarian law as as well as step for
step measures to revitalize the
political process based on un Security
Council resolution
2254 without breaking this political
impass imposed by the Syrian regime the
Invision of a brighter future for Syrian
people becomes more difficult we urge
the regime to use the momentum and not
to delay the convening of the
Constitutional committee as a practical
necessary step to put back in track the
Syrian Le un facilitated political
process and we support the efforts of
the special invo Pon in this
regard president the humanitarian
situation is an extension of the
political stall mate the economic
Devastation including inflation
unemployment and the collapse of the
essential Services has compounded the
already D humanitarian situation putting
communities into further desperation
the International Community should stand
in solidarity with Syrian people and
deep on its support for the humanitarian
response plan the aid delivery should
remain predictable sustainable and
transparent in this vein we urge for the
extension of the authorization of the
babal Wawa cross border beyond the
January
deadline president silence is no longer
an option this Council should be United
in supporting the people in Syria we own
it to the millions of refugees who
cannot return safely to their homes we
own it to the children stripped stripped
of their childhoods and victims of
sexual and gender-based
violence we believe that pursue pursuit
of justice is fundamental to provide
some relief for the victims of torure
and gross gross human rights violations
to restore human dignity and provide
close osure to families of missing
people or Deton the decision of last
month of icj for Syria to take all
measures to prevent Act of torture and
other cruel treatment is a landmark for
accountability in other potential
positive note an upcoming launch of the
independent institution on missing
persons in Syria a mechanism supported
by Albania when voted in the ga in June
would provide an answer for the hundreds
of thousand Thousand Lives interrupted
for all those whose Faith remains
unknown and voice
silent above all it would bring an end
to the suffering of the families who saw
their loved ones forcibly separated in
the shadows of the conflict and it is
important this process to be transparent
and coordinated with UN in concluding I
want to reiterate that Albania will
remain a strong advocate of the Syrian
people in their Pursuit for justice and
for a better future in dignity I thank
you I thank the representative of
Albania for your statement I will not
make a statement in my national capacity
as representative of Ecuador we take
note and uh thank uh uh gy peton and
Madame Lisa Doon of OA for their
briefings and I welcome the the
representatives of Syria turkey and Iran
on to the meeting for Ecuador it is
essential to step up diplomatic efforts
that make it possible to re-engage
dialogue and move towards a political
solution to the situation in Syria in
Conformity with the provisions of
resolution 2254 we would encourage the
special Envoy to continue conversations
with the members of the aana group
neighboring countries Regional partners
and other actors inside and outside of
Syria with the goal of bringing about
the meetings of the Constitutional
committee and to discuss substantive
issues on it regarding its operations we
agree with the special Envoy peton when
he states that there is a direct
relationship between the lack of
progress in the political sphere and the
risk of an escalation of
violence these uh this impact will
further complicate uh the security and
humanitarian situation in Syria and the
region we regret that the the current
outbreak of conflict in the region has
led to an escalation of violence in
Syria and his increased threats to the
civilian population the escalation of
hostilities in Damascus idb and uh
Western Aleppo speak to the fact that
Syria is experiencing the most violent
period since 2019 right now it's
unacceptable that 45,000 people in the
city of
ea uh remain without access to uh
sources of drinking water due to the
military use of the water station which
increases the risk of the spread of
diseases such as cholera we would like
to make an appeal to abide by
International humanitarian law and in in
this context to protect the civilian
population infrastructure critical for
their survival as well as uh
humanitarian assistance actors the sheer
number of people that require
humanitarian assistance to survive in a
situation of poverty malnutrition and
displacement should serve as a reminder
to the C that the council must continue
to examine the situation in Syria
furthermore we urge the government of
Syria to offer responses on the
condition and whereabouts of disappeared
persons and those arbitrarily detained
as well as to establish a transparent
system of accountability we'd like to
express the hope that all uh political
and social sectors of society especially
women take a meaningful part in the
processes aimed at building a peaceful
and pro prosperous F future in Syria
with the goal of restoring a Civic space
and the rule of
law in conclusion I'd like to Express
gratitude to Brazil and Switzerland for
their commitment and work as co-
penholders Ecuador will continue to
support efforts to facilitate uh uh uh
the work of the UN team on the ground
and uh provide humanitarian assistance
to the people of Syria thank you very
much I go back to my role as president
of the council and I now give the floor
to the representative
of this year in Arab
Republic say the race thank you Mr
President at the outset I congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency
of the security Council for this month I
also thank your predecessor the
permanent representative of the People's
Republic of China for successfully
conducting the work of the council last
month Mr
President today's briefing on the
political and humanitarian question in
my country Syria is the last for this
year it is
held am
midst ongoing threats and
challenges my country has been facing
for
years due to terrorism the illegal
military presence of the US and Turkish
forces in part of Syria the escalation
of repeated Israeli attacks on Syria's
vital facilities and the exacerbation of
the humanitarian crisis due to the
failure of donors to fund the
humanitarian response plan in addition
to the disastrous repercussions of the
illegal unilateral coercive measures
imposed by Western countries on my
country therefore the condemnation of
this Council of all these violations of
Syrian sovereignty Unity territorial
territorial Integrity international law
and the charter of the UN is a legal
responsibility and a humanitarian
necessity
Mr
President we have listened to the
briefing by Mr G Pon the special Envoy
for
Syria and we continue to engage in
dialogue and coordinate with him on his
work the deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs and expatriates have met Mr
Peterson last week in Geneva and
stressed Syria commitment to a Syrian Le
Syrian old political process without any
external interference on the basis of
the respect for Syria's Independence
sovereignty unity and territorial
Integrity Mr President it is regrettable
that 75 years since the adoption of the
universal Declaration of Human Rights we
witness some Western countries
continuing to act in contempt of the
Declaration through their complicity and
taking part in brutal crimes and
genocide committed by Israel in the Gaza
Strip and through their continued
aggression against Syrian infrastructure
and Lebanese infrastructure the latest
of which was the rocket attack that
targeted Reef
deash on the 17th of this month Syria
warns Israel against the consequences of
continuing to persist in these attacks
which could push the region towards a
comprehensive escalation that cannot be
contained and the consequences for the
region and the world would be
unsustainable
ladies and gentlemen the US and the EU
EU continue to impose unilateral
inhumane sanctions that have significant
impact on the enjoyment of the most
basic human rights by syrians including
children women and the elderly as they
are denied food Medical Care electricity
housing and essential
Services the report of Miss Elena Doan
the special repur on the negative impact
of the unilateral cve measures on the
enjoyment of Human Rights is proof of
this and I
quote the comprehensiveness of existing
unil unilateral sanctions against the
Syrian Arab Republic and the growing
over compliance in particular following
the imposition in 2019 of the Caesar
civilian uh Syrian civilian protection
act by the US of America have placed the
country in a a straight jacket with
serious adverse effects on the broad
spectrum of Human Rights here would like
to commend the adoption by the ga of the
resolution unilateral
economic measures as a means of
political and economic coercion against
developing countries which requests the
Secretary General to Monitor and study
the impact on the affected States my
delegation looks forward to the UN and
esquad conducting the study on the
impact of these ucms on un activities
and the humanitarian situation in
Syria Mr
President the United States of America
has not only directly engaged in the
aggression against the Gaza Strip
shoulder by shoulder with the Israeli
war criminals and turning a blind eye to
the repeated Israeli attacks on civilian
infrastruct in Syria it continues its
destructive policies by insisting on its
illegal military presence on Syrian
territory and its support for separatist
milit its Looting of Syrian resources
oil wheat and gas in addition to
supporting and training the terrorist
groups in alh and rban camps and in the
same context the Turkish forces continue
their illegal presence on our territory
and they provide logistical military and
financial support to terrorist
organizations in northwest of Syria
which are listed as terrorist groups by
the security Council Mr
President the Syrian Arab Republic
affirms that the return of Syrian
refugees to their Homeland is a
fundamental
objective Syrian refugees returning to
their country enjoy like other Syrian
citizens all the rights and duties
guaranteed by the Constitution and the
law La in this context measures and um
steps have been taken to provide for the
dignified Return of the refugees we
continue to take a positive approach to
overcome the repercussions of the
terrorist war against Syria following
the amnesty decree issued by the
president of the Republic last month the
Syrian
government opened the door for
regularizing
um the security situation of all those
who entered or left Syria illegally also
we announced further measures related to
the Recruitment and the laws on military
service the government of Syria
continues to coordinate and cooperate
with
AA towards improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria my
country has recently
renewed for an additional 3 months the
authorization granted to the UN to use
bab Al Sal and alai Crossings out of our
concern for humanitarian assistance to
reach beneficiaries throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic including in the
Northwest however these joint efforts
face the real problem of the low funding
rate of the humanitarian response plan
which did not ex exceed 33% and we are
just days away from the end of the year
the world food program due to the lack
of funding has announced the end of its
food assistance program starting next
month throughout
Syria my delegation is surprised that
some un teams are reaching out to
terrorist
organizations listed by the security
Council and we stress the need for them
to stop this immediately we also stress
that the continued presence of 's office
in gazi andab is a waste of resources at
the expense at the expense of those who
really need the assistance and deserve
it ladies and
gentlemen we demand the halt of
politicizing humanitarian work and
putting political conditions on early
recovery
projects and providing sustainable
solution and an immediate end and
unconditional end to ucms we also stress
the need for the repeated Israeli
aggressions on our civilian airports to
stop this has led
to cancellation of a total of 27 un
humanitarian flights between the 12th of
October and the 1st of December I thank
you I thank
the distinguished representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic and I now give the
floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran in the name of
God the compassionate the merciful Mr
President we thank Mr Peterson the
special Envoy and Miss D for OA from OA
for their briefing Mr pres Mr President
the humanitarian situation in Syria
remains extremely challenging people are
grappling with economic hardship were
sent by the US imposition of unlawful
sanctions adding to this challenge in
the difficult under funding the
humanitarian response plan with only 32%
of the needed funds secured this
significant shortfall is seriously
hindering the capacity of the
UN a commitment to impartial assistance
is crucial to ensuring that the
humanitarian Affairs serve the needs of
the affected people without being
influenced by political considerations
donors must ref refrain from using Aid
to exert political pressure on Syrian
government Mr President on the political
track we support the resuming of meeting
of the Constitutional committee as an
effective mechanism for advancing the
political process we support the special
envoice Affair and his diplomatic
engagement with the parties to
facilitate the resumption of committee
meeting and to advance the political
process the United Nations role should
remain supportive ensuring that the
entire process is Guided by Syrian
leadership and ownership Iran stands in
favor of Return of Syrian refugee to
their Homeland the United Nations
especially the High Commissioner for
Refugee plays a central role in this
undertaking we appreciate the support
and support the engagement and
constructive dialogue between the Syrian
officials and the UN in addressing this
pressing issue Mr president the security
situation in areas controlled by illegal
foreign forces and under occupation is a
matter of serious concern the primary
source of insecurity is unlawful
presence and continued occupation of US
military forces creating an environment
conductive on to the growth of the
terrorist activities within Syria and
the broader region at the same time the
Israeli regime persist in its Act of
aggression against Syrian territory in
parall with the atrocities in the Gaza
Strip This regime engag in terrorism and
aggr within Syrian borders intentionally
targeting civilians and critical
infrastructure we strongly condemn the
terrorist attack on its military
advisers in Syria on 2nd December where
two Iranian advisor were mured during
their mission to support the Syrian Army
against terrorism we reaffirm inherent
right of the Syrian Arab Republic under
international law to take all necessary
measures in response to terrorist
attacks and act of aggression by the
Israeli regime we warn against any
proactive actions by the Israeli regime
that could seriously impact peace and
Security in the region Iran call on the
security Council to condemn the
stabilizing activities of the Israeli
regime and its Sor violation of C
sovereignty and territorial Integrity
which pose a threat to peace and
stability in the region in conclusion Mr
President the groundless allegation made
against my country by the representative
of the United States in this chamber
that was repeated by the UK is
categorically rejected contrary to this
unfounded claim Iran has consistently
demonstrate its commitment to promoting
peace and Security in the region the
United States is fully responsible for
its decade long aggressions along with
other crimes and unlawful measures in
our region obstructing the security
Council from fulfilling its Charter
based duties to establish a ceasefire
and to stop the Israeli War Machine
against the people of Kaza for more than
two months has called in doubt the US
real concerns about the spillover of the
tension and peace and Security in the
region I thank you
I thank the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran and I now give
the floor to the representative
turkey thank you Mr
President this week marks the 8th
anniversary of the adoption of the
security Council resolution
2254 the resolution reflects the
Contours of a consensual road map for
the achievement of a lasting solution
to the Syrian
conflict it remains most reliable
framework for a sustainable way out of
the Syrian
crisis which is through an inclusive
Syrian owned Syrian L political process
that meets the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian
people it mandates the UN to convince
representatives of the Syrian regime and
the opposition to engage
inal negotiations on a political
transition process and most
importantly it stresses the undeniable
fact that it is the Syrian people who
will decide the future of their country
all syrians including the opposition
diaspora and
refugees 8 years after its adoption in
this chamber the vision
goals and road map set forth in
resolution
2254 continue to constitute the
international consensus for the
resolution of the Syrian conflict that
being said Syria has fallen off many
raders
recently currently fluidity of the
situation in the country in The Wider
region should not hold us back from
addressing the root causes of the
problem Syria is not a postconflict
country it cannot be without
guaranteeing its territorial integrity
and political Unity nor can it be
without a reinvigorated political
process in line with resolution
2254 or without putting an end to the
separatist agenda of terrorist
organizations and creating conditions
for for voluntary safe and dignified
return of Syrian
refugees our overall efforts toward the
settlement of the conflict must be aimed
at a genuine National
reconciliation however this is not
possible by playing against time and
with half-hearted efforts that do not
contribute to these
objectives it is imperative to overcome
the current inertia in the political
track and to convene the ninth round of
the Constitutional committee without
further
delay the status quo in Syria has become
unsustainable not only politically but
also in terms of its humanitarian and
security
dimensions in the 13th year of the
conflict living conditions of the Syrian
people are getting hard harder every day
it is becoming more difficult to access
basic needs economic crisis is worsening
deprivation is an everyday reality for
millions in the face of existing
domestic problems as well as risks of
regional conflagration of the conflict
in Gaza the preservation of calm in
Syria is of critical importance
that is why we call on all relevant
parties both in the region and
Beyond to deescalate
tensions Mr President regrettably today
we heard once again a reference by un
special Envoy to
stdf an F shoot of pkk ypg terrorist
organization as if it were a legitimate
actor
turkey's counterterrorism operations in
the country are an exercise of its
inherent right of self-defense in
response to acts of terrorism of this
organization pkk ypg Terror organization
continues it its attempts to advance its
separatist agenda in Syria these
attempts include oppressing local
populations forcibly Rec recruiting
children military use and exploitation
of Civilian
infrastructure I would like to underline
once again that empowering this
terrorist organization serves no other
purpose than sowing seeds of further
instability in Syria and Beyond we will
certainly do not allow this criminal
entity to realize it Insidious
designs Mr President as regards to
humanitarian
situation we observe that serious
shortcomings have emerged in the last
months we would like to emphasize the
importance of uninterrupted delivery of
crossborder humanitarian assistance
which helps 4.1 million people to hold
on to life in Northwest
Syria in this connection we once again
underline significance of the UN
monitoring mechanism which guarantees
the transparency of the aid
deliveries planned budget cuts on
humanitarian assistance towards Syria
are also a serious source of
concern under these circumstances all
stakeholders and donors have important
responsibilities to help eliminate risks
facing un humanitarian response in
Syria we expect the continued use of
Babel Hawa Babel Salam and alra border
crossings for un Aid
deliveries the continued engagement of
the UN Security Council is essential in
this regard turkey will will continue to
support the people of Syria and all
initiatives towards a sustainable
solution to the Syrian conflict I thank
you I thank the representative turkey
for statement there are no further
speakers on the list I now invite
members of the council to informal
consultations to continue uh discussing
this item thank you the meeting's aour
for
spe
e
for
spe
e
for
yeah
e
Happ
spe
for
e
supp
for
e
never
that
for
e
spe
for
wish
thank
you
for
than
s
don't want to be
satellite
for
spe
e
for
spe
e
for
spe
e
for
spe
e
for
[Music]
SS Ian
Miller
[Music]
[Laughter]
for
[Music]
[Applause]
for
[Music]
the